README.MD, before:

# MonsterGenerators

This project is a Python package for procedurally generating fantasy monster data. It includes a command-line tool and a library to create monster "seeds" with unique stats, traits, dual-types, and abilities. It can format this data into Pokedex-style catalog entries, raw data for game development, and detailed prompts for AI image generators.

## Features

* **Dual-Type System**: Monsters are generated with a primary type and have a chance to gain a secondary type, creating complex and unique creatures.
* **Stat Biasing**: Each monster's stats are intelligently biased based on its primary and secondary types, giving them a distinct feel.
* **Mutagens**: Apply "mutagens" (major, minor, and utility) to generate unique "wild" instances with special stats, tags, and abilities.
* **Re-roll Attributes**: Fine-tune generated monsters by re-rolling specific attributes like traits or major mutagens.
* **Multiple Output Formats**:
  * **Canonical Dex Entries**: Generate Pokedex-style entries that describe the pure, base form of a species.
  * **Unique Instances**: Generate the raw data for a fully randomized "wild" monster, perfect for in-game encounters.
  * **AI Art Prompts**: Convert monster data into a detailed, style-compliant prompt for image models like DALL-E or Stable Diffusion.
* **Powerful Command-Line Interface**: A rich CLI with subcommands for accessing all of the generator's features.

## Installation

This project is managed with modern Python packaging standards using `pyproject.toml`.

To install the package for development, clone the repository and run the following command in the project root:

```bash
pip install -e .[dev]
```

* The `-e` flag installs the package in "editable" mode, so your code changes are immediately reflected.
* The `[dev]` part installs all the extra tools for development and testing, like `pytest`.

This command also installs the `mongen` command-line tool.

## CLI Usage

The `mongen` tool uses subcommands to access its different features.

### `mongen dexentry`

Generates the "canonical" Pokedex-style entry for a species (base stats + type bias, no mutagens).

**Examples:**

```shell
  # Generate a single dex entry for a random monster
mongen dexentry

  # Generate 5 entries for Sylvan monsters and save them to a file
mongen dexentry --primary_type Sylvan --count 5 --output ./sylvan_dex.txt

  # Generate an entry for a monster that is primarily Mineral and secondarily Frost
mongen dexentry --primary_type Mineral --secondary_type Frost
```

### `mongen unique`

Generates the raw data for a single "wild" monster instance, including randomized mutagens. This is perfect for game encounters.

**Examples:**

```shell
  # Get the raw data for one fully randomized monster
mongen unique

  # Generate a unique Dread monster with a 60% chance of a random secondary type
mongen unique --primary_type Dread --secondary_type random

  # Generate a powerful unique monster with extra mutagens
mongen unique --primary_type Inferno --majors 2 --utilities 1
```

### `mongen reroll`

Re-rolls attributes of a previously generated monster. This is useful for fine-tuning a monster you like without starting from scratch. Each re-roll creates a *new* monster with a new PIN.

**Examples:**

```shell
  # Re-roll the traits of a monster with a given PIN
  mongen reroll <PIN> --traits

  # Re-roll the major mutagen of a monster with a given PIN
  mongen reroll <PIN> --majors
```

*You can find a monster's PIN in the output of the `unique` command or in the cached data.*

### `mongen artprompt`

Generates a detailed prompt for an AI image generator based on a fully realized monster.

**Examples:**

```shell
  # Generate a prompt for a random monster
mongen artprompt

  # Generate a prompt for a Mythic/Electric monster and save it
mongen artprompt -t1 Mythic -t2 Electric -o ./prompts.txt --json
```

*The `--json` flag will also save the monster's raw data, which is useful for regenerating the same image later.*

### `mongen list`

Lists the available data used by the generator.

**Examples:**

```shell
  # List all available primary monster types
mongen list --types

  # List all available mutagens
mongen list --mutagens
```

## Library Usage

In addition to the CLI, you can use `MonsterGenerators` as a Python library to integrate monster generation into your own applications.

### Generating a Monster

The core of the library is the `generate_monster` function, which creates a `MonsterSeed` object containing the monster's data.

```python
from mongens.mon_forge import generate_monster

  # Generate a complete monster with a primary type and a few mutagens
monster = generate_monster(
    idnum=1,
    primary_type="Brawler",
    secondary_type="Mineral",
    major_count=1,
    util_count=1,
)

  # The result is a MonsterSeed dataclass instance
print(monster.species)
print(monster.stats)
print(monster.mutagens)
```

### Creating a Dex Entry

You can format a `MonsterSeed` into a human-readable "Pokedex-style" entry.

```python
from mongens.mon_forge import generate_monster
from mongens.dex_entries import dex_formatter

  # First, generate a monster
monster = generate_monster(
    idnum=1,
    primary_type="Astral",
    major_count=1,
    util_count=0
)

# Then, format it into a dex entry
dex_entry = dex_formatter(monster)
print(dex_entry)
```

### Generating an AI Art Prompt

The library can also generate a detailed prompt for an AI image generator based on a monster's data.

```python
from mongens.mon_forge import generate_monster
from mongens.prompt_engine import construct_mon_prompt

  # Generate a visually interesting monster
monster = generate_monster(
    idnum=42,
    primary_type="Toxic",
    secondary_type="Ancient",
    major_count=1,
    util_count=1
)

  # Construct the art prompt
art_prompt = construct_mon_prompt(monster)
print(art_prompt)
```

Commit message:

Refactor: Introduce AI Context and Documentation Restructure
This commit introduces a significant refactor of the project's documentation and AI context.

**Key Changes:**

*   **New `docs/ai_context` directory:** This directory now houses all documentation relevant to the AI's understanding of the project, including:
	*   `00_README.md`: Overview of the AI context.
	*   `appendices/`: Supplementary information.
	*   `architecture_overview.md`: High-level system architecture.
	*   `design_bible.md`: Core design principles and guidelines.
	*   `lore_core.md`: Project lore and narrative elements.
	*   `module_purposes/`: Detailed descriptions of each module's role.
	*   `naming_conventions.md`: Standardized naming practices.
	*   `schemas/`: Definitions of data schemas used in the project.
*   **Documentation Restructure:**
	*   Existing documentation files (`LogicArchitecture.md`, `LumenStoryNotes.md`, `PixelArtStyleGuide.md`, `ProjectManifesto.md`, `USAGE.MD`, `mongen_dexentry.txt`) have been moved into a new `docs/misc` directory to better organize non-AI-specific documentation.
	*   `DEV_BIBLE.md` has been removed, with its content integrated into the new AI context documentation.
	*   `ProjectTree.md` has been moved and updated.
	*   `DETAILED_ANALYSIS.md` has been added for in-depth project analysis.
*   **Data File Updates:**
	*   New YAML files (`major_mods.yaml`, `seed_types.yaml`, `type_data.yaml`, `type_forms.yaml`, `utility_mods.yaml`) have been added to `src/mongens/data` for better data management and configuration.
	*   `src/mongens/data/enums/silhouette.py` has been removed, likely replaced by data-driven configurations.
*   **Code Modifications:**
	*   Minor modifications across various source files (`cli.py`, `__init__.py`, `art_data.py`, `data.py`, `dex_entries.py`, `forge_name.py`, `mon_forge.py`, `monster_cache.

README.MD, after:

# MonsterGenerators

Last updated: 2026-01-13 04:56:41 -07:00

This project is a Python package for procedurally generating fantasy monster data. It includes a command-line tool and a library to create monster "seeds" with unique stats, traits, dual-types, and abilities. It can format this data into Pokedex-style catalog entries, raw data for game development, and detailed prompts for AI image generators.

## Changelog

### 2026-01-13
- Updated documentation and examples to use the canonical type taxonomy.
- Clarified mutagen categories and CLI flag usage.
- Added documentation update stamps across core project docs.

## Features

* **Dual-Type System**: Monsters are generated with a primary type and have a chance to gain a secondary type, creating complex and unique creatures.
* **Stat Biasing**: Each monster's stats are intelligently biased based on its primary and secondary types, giving them a distinct feel.
* **Mutagens**: Apply "mutagens" (major and utility) to generate unique "wild" instances with special stats, tags, and abilities.
* **Re-roll Attributes**: Fine-tune generated monsters by re-rolling specific attributes like traits or major mutagens.
* **Multiple Output Formats**:
  * **Canonical Dex Entries**: Generate Pokedex-style entries that describe the pure, base form of a species.
  * **Unique Instances**: Generate the raw data for a fully randomized "wild" monster, perfect for in-game encounters.
  * **AI Art Prompts**: Convert monster data into a detailed, style-compliant prompt for image models like DALL-E or Stable Diffusion.
* **Powerful Command-Line Interface**: A rich CLI with subcommands for accessing all of the generator's features.

## Installation

This project is managed with modern Python packaging standards using `pyproject.toml`.

To install the package for development, clone the repository and run the following command in the project root:

```bash
pip install -e .[dev]
```

* The `-e` flag installs the package in "editable" mode, so your code changes are immediately reflected.
* The `[dev]` part installs all the extra tools for development and testing, like `pytest`.

This command also installs the `mongen` command-line tool.

## CLI Usage

The `mongen` tool uses subcommands to access its different features.

### `mongen dexentry`

Generates the "canonical" Pokedex-style entry for a species (base stats + type bias, no mutagens).

**Examples:**

```shell
  # Generate a single dex entry for a random monster
mongen dexentry

  # Generate 5 entries for Bloom monsters and save them to a file
mongen dexentry --primary_type Bloom --count 5 --output ./bloom_dex.txt

  # Generate an entry for a monster that is primarily Axiom and secondarily Flow
mongen dexentry --primary_type Axiom --secondary_type Flow
```

### `mongen unique`

Generates the raw data for a single "wild" monster instance, including randomized mutagens. This is perfect for game encounters.

**Examples:**

```shell
  # Get the raw data for one fully randomized monster
mongen unique

  # Generate a unique Dread monster with a 60% chance of a random secondary type
mongen unique --primary_type Dread --secondary_type random

  # Generate a powerful unique monster with extra mutagens
mongen unique --primary_type Idol --majors 2 --utils 1
```

### `mongen reroll`

Re-rolls attributes of a previously generated monster. This is useful for fine-tuning a monster you like without starting from scratch. Each re-roll creates a *new* monster with a new PIN.

**Examples:**

```shell
  # Re-roll the traits of a monster with a given PIN
  mongen reroll <PIN> --traits

  # Re-roll the major mutagen of a monster with a given PIN
  mongen reroll <PIN> --majors
```

*You can find a monster's PIN in the output of the `unique` command or in the cached data.*

### `mongen artprompt`

Generates a detailed prompt for an AI image generator based on a fully realized monster.

**Examples:**

```shell
  # Generate a prompt for a random monster
mongen artprompt

  # Generate a prompt for a Geist/Spur monster and save it
mongen artprompt -t1 Geist -t2 Spur -o ./prompts.txt --json
```

*The `--json` flag will also save the monster's raw data, which is useful for regenerating the same image later.*

### `mongen list`

Lists the available data used by the generator.

**Examples:**

```shell
  # List all available primary monster types
mongen list --types

  # List all available mutagens
mongen list --mutagens
```

## Library Usage

In addition to the CLI, you can use `MonsterGenerators` as a Python library to integrate monster generation into your own applications.

### Generating a Monster

The core of the library is the `generate_monster` function, which creates a `MonsterSeed` object containing the monster's data.

```python
from mongens.mon_forge import generate_monster

  # Generate a complete monster with a primary type and a few mutagens
monster = generate_monster(
    idnum=1,
    primary_type="Bastion",
    secondary_type="Axiom",
    major_count=1,
    util_count=1,
)

  # The result is a MonsterSeed dataclass instance
print(monster.species)
print(monster.stats)
print(monster.mutagens)
```

### Creating a Dex Entry

You can format a `MonsterSeed` into a human-readable "Pokedex-style" entry.

```python
from mongens.mon_forge import generate_monster
from mongens.dex_entries import dex_formatter

  # First, generate a monster
monster = generate_monster(
    idnum=1,
    primary_type="Geist",
    major_count=1,
    util_count=0
)

# Then, format it into a dex entry
dex_entry = dex_formatter(monster)
print(dex_entry)
```

### Generating an AI Art Prompt

The library can also generate a detailed prompt for an AI image generator based on a monster's data.

```python
from mongens.mon_forge import generate_monster
from mongens.prompt_engine import construct_mon_prompt

  # Generate a visually interesting monster
monster = generate_monster(
    idnum=42,
    primary_type="Mire",
    secondary_type="Rift",
    major_count=1,
    util_count=1
)

  # Construct the art prompt
art_prompt = construct_mon_prompt(monster)
print(art_prompt)
```
